src/site/content/en/blog/value-of-speed/index.md, before:

---
title: The value of speed
subhead: Show stakeholders how site speed improvements can increase revenue
authors:
  - linahansson
date: 2019-05-20
hero: hero.jpg
alt: Aircraft instrument panel
description: Demonstrate the revenue generated by site improvements while excluding external factors such as marketing campaigns.
tags:
  - post
  - e-commerce
  - analytics
---

After a lot of hard work, you've done it. You've made your company's site
noticeably faster. Now it's time for the fun part: showing stakeholders how much
extra revenue your work has generated!

In this post we'll walk through how to do that by calculating the _relative
mobile conversion rate_. This metric is useful because it quantifies the
effects of site improvements while excluding external factors like marketing
campaigns, which can obscure your findings. Let's get started!

## Relative Mobile Conversion Rate (Rel mCvR)

A site's conversion rate can be influenced by site characteristics—like speed
and usability—and by external factors—like marketing campaigns, seasonal events,
and the mix of marketing channels.

{% Aside %}
A _conversion_ happens when a site visitor becomes a customer. What counts
as a conversion will vary depending on the nature of the site. Buying a
product, subscribing to a service, registering as a user, or even just
viewing a particular page could be considered a conversion. Check with your
marketing team if you're not sure how conversions are counted in your company.
{% endAside %}

Since you're interested in how site speed affects conversions, the mobile site
is most relevant—that's where you're most likely to see the benefits of
speed improvements. Rather than looking at the mobile conversion rate alone,
though, you'll be analyzing the _relative_ mobile conversion rate (Rel mCvr),
which is calculated by dividing the mobile conversion rate by the desktop
conversion rate. This approach reduces the noise from external factors, which
tend to affect both desktop and mobile, and makes it easier to see whether any
increases in the mobile site's effectiveness were actually caused by the speed
improvements.

![image](relative-versus-absolute.jpg)

{% Aside 'caution' %}
Caution: Rel mCvR is influenced not only by speed, but also by other site 
characteristics like usability. If other big changes were made to the site 
during the period you want to analyze, you won’t be able to measure the effects 
of speed improvements on their own, but you can show the benefits of all the 
improvements as a group.

{% endAside %}

## Doing the analysis

If you have access to your site's page analytics data, you can follow along
using that. In this walkthrough you'll be using Google Analytics to get site
data. If you don't have a Google Analytics account, you can learn how to set one
up at [Getting started
](https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/1008015?hl=en)with Analytics. Or,
if you just want to see how Rel mCvR is calculated, you can get the sample data
set shown below from
[this Google Sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Mxmy1luPBOvJneSM9g2NZt6yHKx8xkpBXygOpm4LgNM/edit?usp=sharing)
and skip steps 1–3.

First you'll get the speed and conversion data for the mobile site.

1.  Open
[this custom report](https://analytics.google.com/analytics/web/template?uid=NPvTU2zoTf2JFsHi6-auyQ)
in Google Analytics, select your site from the **Select a view**
drop-down list, and click **Create**.

1.  Once the report has been generated, click **Select a metric >
Metric Group >** **Ecommerce Conversion Rate**.
![image](conversion-rate.jpg)
<br><br>

1.  Select the **Week** view for the dataset.
![image](landing-pages-week.jpg)
<br><br>

1.  Select a time period that covers 2–3 months before the speed
optimization and 2–3 months after. (In our example, that's January 2018
through October 2018.)
![image](analytics-start-date.jpg)
<br><br>

1.  Export the report to [Google Sheets](http://sheets.google.com) or
your preferred spreadsheet application.
![image](export-google-sheets.jpg)
<br><br>

Now get the speed and conversion data for the desktop site.

1. Open [this custom report](https://analytics.google.com/analytics/web/template?uid=X21Nb_soQp69U_ylfNmLvg)
in Google Analytics and repeat the process for step 1 to export the data to
a spreadsheet.

1.  Copy the _Ecommerce Conversion Rate_ column in the desktop report
spreadsheet and insert it next to the _Ecommerce Conversion Rate_ in the
mobile report spreadsheet.

1.  To calculate the Rel mCvR, create a new column titled _Relative
Mobile Conversion Rate (Rel mCvR)_. Then add a formula to divide the mobile
conversion rate by the desktop conversion rate.
<br><br>
![image](relative-rate-formula.jpg)
<br><br>

Next,create a chart based on the _Mobile Avg. Page Load Time (sec)_ and
_Relative Mobile Conversion Rate (Rel mCvR)_ columns.

To do that in Google Sheets:

1.  Click **Insert > Chart**.
1.  In the **Chart Editor **pane, select the **Line chart** chart type.
1.  Select the _Week Index_, _Mobile Avg. Page Load Time (sec)_, and
        _Relative Mobile Conversion Rate (Rel mCvR)_ columns as the data ranges.
1.  Click the **Customize** tab and then select** Series**.
1.  In the **Series selector **drop-down list, select **Relative
        Mobile Conversion Rate (Rel mCvR)**.
1.  In the **Axis** drop-down list select **Right axis**.
1.  If you like, click **Chart & axis titles** to customize the chart title and
the left and right _y_-axis labels.

You should now have a chart that looks something like this:
![image](mobile-versus-relative-chart.jpg)
<br><br>

Using the chart, identify a period before the speed optimization
    (when load times were high) and a period after the speed optimization (when
    load times should be lower) that you want to analyze. In this example, you
    would compare eight weeks in Jan–Feb to eight weeks in Aug–Sept.

In a new sheet, calculate the average load time and rel mCvR for the
    two periods. Then add the revenue coming from mobile visitors during the
    period after the speed optimization (Aug–Sept in the example). You find
    revenue data in Google Analytics under the section **Audience > Mobile >
    Overview**.

![image](period-revenue.jpg)

Now calculate what the revenue would have been if Rel mCvR had not
    improved. Do this by dividing the revenue (€1,835,962) by the current Rel
    mCvR (51%) and multiplying by the Rel mCvR for the period before the speed
    optimization (42%).

![image](revenue-would-have-been.jpg)

Subtract the revenue that the company earned from what it would have
    earned if Rel mCvR had not improved.

![image](extra-revenue-formula.jpg)

In this example, the company earned an additional €323,993 in eight weeks thanks
to Rel mCvR improving—that is, thanks to the mobile site becoming faster.

![image](thanks-to-increased.jpg)

## Things to consider when analyzing Rel mCvR

* As noted above, other changes to the site, such as UX improvements, can 
influence Rel mCvR. Check that speed was the only big change to the site during 
the period you want to study. If there were other changes, Rel mCvR can tell you 
the effect of the changes as a group, but not of an individual change.

* Watch out for any changes or events that affected the desktop site but not the 
mobile site—they can skew your results. If you discover any desktop-only 
changes, omit the affected period from your analysis.

* You might wonder whether an increase in Rel mCvR is caused by a shift in 
conversions from desktop to mobile rather than an increase in conversions 
overall. While there is likely to be some change in the mix of desktop and 
mobile conversions due to speed improvements, keep in mind that Rel mCvR 
calculates the mobile conversion rate relative to the desktop conversion rate. 
So, you only see an increase in Rel mCvR when mCvR goes up more than dCvR. In 
other words, you’re excluding a chunk of mobile conversions from your count, 
which provides a safety margin that can absorb any possible increase caused by 
a shift in channels.

## Summing up

While it has some limitations, Rel mCvR is a great low-cost way to estimate how
much a speed optimization increased revenue without, for example, having to run
server-side or slow-down tests. And quantifying the relationship between
performance and revenue can help you demonstrate the value of development
projects whose benefits might not be immediately clear to non-technical
stakeholders.

## Next steps

+ [Discover performance opportunities with Lighthouse](/discover-performance-opportunities-with-lighthouse)

+ [Performance budgets 101](/performance-budgets-101)

Commit message:

Added credit for hero image

src/site/content/en/blog/value-of-speed/index.md, after:

---
title: The value of speed
subhead: Show stakeholders how site speed improvements can increase revenue
authors:
  - linahansson
date: 2019-05-20
hero: hero.jpg
alt: Aircraft instrument panel, photographer Arie Wubben via unsplash.com
description: Demonstrate the revenue generated by site improvements while excluding external factors such as marketing campaigns.
tags:
  - post
  - e-commerce
  - analytics
---

After a lot of hard work, you've done it. You've made your company's site
noticeably faster. Now it's time for the fun part: showing stakeholders how much
extra revenue your work has generated!

In this post we'll walk through how to do that by calculating the _relative
mobile conversion rate_. This metric is useful because it quantifies the
effects of site improvements while excluding external factors like marketing
campaigns, which can obscure your findings. Let's get started!

## Relative Mobile Conversion Rate (Rel mCvR)

A site's conversion rate can be influenced by site characteristics—like speed
and usability—and by external factors—like marketing campaigns, seasonal events,
and the mix of marketing channels.

{% Aside %}
A _conversion_ happens when a site visitor becomes a customer. What counts
as a conversion will vary depending on the nature of the site. Buying a
product, subscribing to a service, registering as a user, or even just
viewing a particular page could be considered a conversion. Check with your
marketing team if you're not sure how conversions are counted in your company.
{% endAside %}

Since you're interested in how site speed affects conversions, the mobile site
is most relevant—that's where you're most likely to see the benefits of
speed improvements. Rather than looking at the mobile conversion rate alone,
though, you'll be analyzing the _relative_ mobile conversion rate (Rel mCvr),
which is calculated by dividing the mobile conversion rate by the desktop
conversion rate. This approach reduces the noise from external factors, which
tend to affect both desktop and mobile, and makes it easier to see whether any
increases in the mobile site's effectiveness were actually caused by the speed
improvements.

![image](relative-versus-absolute.jpg)

{% Aside 'caution' %}
Caution: Rel mCvR is influenced not only by speed, but also by other site
characteristics like usability. If other big changes were made to the site
during the period you want to analyze, you won’t be able to measure the effects
of speed improvements on their own, but you can show the benefits of all the
improvements as a group.

{% endAside %}

## Doing the analysis

If you have access to your site's page analytics data, you can follow along
using that. In this walkthrough you'll be using Google Analytics to get site
data. If you don't have a Google Analytics account, you can learn how to set one
up at [Getting started
](https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/1008015?hl=en)with Analytics. Or,
if you just want to see how Rel mCvR is calculated, you can get the sample data
set shown below from
[this Google Sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Mxmy1luPBOvJneSM9g2NZt6yHKx8xkpBXygOpm4LgNM/edit?usp=sharing)
and skip steps 1–3.

First you'll get the speed and conversion data for the mobile site.

1.  Open
[this custom report](https://analytics.google.com/analytics/web/template?uid=NPvTU2zoTf2JFsHi6-auyQ)
in Google Analytics, select your site from the **Select a view**
drop-down list, and click **Create**.

1.  Once the report has been generated, click **Select a metric >
Metric Group >** **Ecommerce Conversion Rate**.
![image](conversion-rate.jpg)
<br><br>

1.  Select the **Week** view for the dataset.
![image](landing-pages-week.jpg)
<br><br>

1.  Select a time period that covers 2–3 months before the speed
optimization and 2–3 months after. (In our example, that's January 2018
through October 2018.)
![image](analytics-start-date.jpg)
<br><br>

1.  Export the report to [Google Sheets](http://sheets.google.com) or
your preferred spreadsheet application.
![image](export-google-sheets.jpg)
<br><br>

Now get the speed and conversion data for the desktop site.

1. Open [this custom report](https://analytics.google.com/analytics/web/template?uid=X21Nb_soQp69U_ylfNmLvg)
in Google Analytics and repeat the process for step 1 to export the data to
a spreadsheet.

1.  Copy the _Ecommerce Conversion Rate_ column in the desktop report
spreadsheet and insert it next to the _Ecommerce Conversion Rate_ in the
mobile report spreadsheet.

1.  To calculate the Rel mCvR, create a new column titled _Relative
Mobile Conversion Rate (Rel mCvR)_. Then add a formula to divide the mobile
conversion rate by the desktop conversion rate.
<br><br>
![image](relative-rate-formula.jpg)
<br><br>

Next,create a chart based on the _Mobile Avg. Page Load Time (sec)_ and
_Relative Mobile Conversion Rate (Rel mCvR)_ columns.

To do that in Google Sheets:

1.  Click **Insert > Chart**.
1.  In the **Chart Editor **pane, select the **Line chart** chart type.
1.  Select the _Week Index_, _Mobile Avg. Page Load Time (sec)_, and
        _Relative Mobile Conversion Rate (Rel mCvR)_ columns as the data ranges.
1.  Click the **Customize** tab and then select** Series**.
1.  In the **Series selector **drop-down list, select **Relative
        Mobile Conversion Rate (Rel mCvR)**.
1.  In the **Axis** drop-down list select **Right axis**.
1.  If you like, click **Chart & axis titles** to customize the chart title and
the left and right _y_-axis labels.

You should now have a chart that looks something like this:
![image](mobile-versus-relative-chart.jpg)
<br><br>

Using the chart, identify a period before the speed optimization
    (when load times were high) and a period after the speed optimization (when
    load times should be lower) that you want to analyze. In this example, you
    would compare eight weeks in Jan–Feb to eight weeks in Aug–Sept.

In a new sheet, calculate the average load time and rel mCvR for the
    two periods. Then add the revenue coming from mobile visitors during the
    period after the speed optimization (Aug–Sept in the example). You find
    revenue data in Google Analytics under the section **Audience > Mobile >
    Overview**.

![image](period-revenue.jpg)

Now calculate what the revenue would have been if Rel mCvR had not
    improved. Do this by dividing the revenue (€1,835,962) by the current Rel
    mCvR (51%) and multiplying by the Rel mCvR for the period before the speed
    optimization (42%).

![image](revenue-would-have-been.jpg)

Subtract the revenue that the company earned from what it would have
    earned if Rel mCvR had not improved.

![image](extra-revenue-formula.jpg)

In this example, the company earned an additional €323,993 in eight weeks thanks
to Rel mCvR improving—that is, thanks to the mobile site becoming faster.

![image](thanks-to-increased.jpg)

## Things to consider when analyzing Rel mCvR

* As noted above, other changes to the site, such as UX improvements, can
influence Rel mCvR. Check that speed was the only big change to the site during
the period you want to study. If there were other changes, Rel mCvR can tell you
the effect of the changes as a group, but not of an individual change.

* Watch out for any changes or events that affected the desktop site but not the
mobile site—they can skew your results. If you discover any desktop-only
changes, omit the affected period from your analysis.

* You might wonder whether an increase in Rel mCvR is caused by a shift in
conversions from desktop to mobile rather than an increase in conversions
overall. While there is likely to be some change in the mix of desktop and
mobile conversions due to speed improvements, keep in mind that Rel mCvR
calculates the mobile conversion rate relative to the desktop conversion rate.
So, you only see an increase in Rel mCvR when mCvR goes up more than dCvR. In
other words, you’re excluding a chunk of mobile conversions from your count,
which provides a safety margin that can absorb any possible increase caused by
a shift in channels.

## Summing up

While it has some limitations, Rel mCvR is a great low-cost way to estimate how
much a speed optimization increased revenue without, for example, having to run
server-side or slow-down tests. And quantifying the relationship between
performance and revenue can help you demonstrate the value of development
projects whose benefits might not be immediately clear to non-technical
stakeholders.

## Next steps

+ [Discover performance opportunities with Lighthouse](/discover-performance-opportunities-with-lighthouse)

+ [Performance budgets 101](/performance-budgets-101)

*Aircraft instrument panel image by
[Arie Wubben](https://unsplash.com/photos/MHIw0nSxCR4) on
[Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/)*
